they were preoccupied with the way in which technology materialised memory – hence a fascination with television, vinyl records, audiotape, and with the sounds of these technologies breaking down. This fixation on materialised memory led to what is perhaps the principal sonic signature of hauntology: the use of crackle
It is the contention of this book that 21st-century culture is marked by anachronism and inertia. But this stasis has been buried, interred behind a superficial frenzy of ‘newness’, of perpetual movement. The ‘jumbling up of time’, the montaging of earlier eras, has ceased to be worthy of comment; it is now so prevalent that is no longer even noticed.
The slow cancellation of the future.
It doesn’t feel like the future. Or, alternatively, it doesn’t feel as if the 21st century has started yet.
The shift into so-called Post-Fordism – with globalisation, ubiquitous computerisation and the casualisation of labour – resulted in a complete transformation in the way that work and leisure were organised. In the last 10 to 15 years, meanwhile, the internet and mobile telecommunications technology have altered the texture of everyday experience beyond all recognition. Yet, perhaps because of all this, there’s an increasing sense that culture has lost the ability to grasp and articulate the present. Or it could be that, in one very important sense, there is no present to grasp and articulate any more.
Any decade you didn’t live through can have a sort of altered, mythological status. You get the artistic or historical highlights without the understanding of day-to-day life back then; you get an idea of the time filtered through and in conversation with a society having had a few more decades of existence.
After years of living with one revival after another, retro culture is inextricably woven into our contemporary experience.In an era where we have access to all of pop history at any time, it feels normal, legible, to have all these decades collapsed together. But one decade still casts a particularly long shadow, and that, of course, is the ’80s.
The End of History? What we may be witnessing is not just the end of the Cold War, or the passing of a particular period of post-war history, but the end of history as such: that is, the end point of mankind's ideological evolution and the universalization of Western liberal democracy as the final form of human government.
hauntology, that largely British genre of eerie electronics fixated on ideas of decaying memory and lost futures.
it suggests a city haunted not only by the past but by lost futures. It seems to have less to do with a near future than with the tantalising ache of a future just out of reach.
there was a trajectory, and this trajectory was interrupted. And now we find ourselves haunted by this future that we vaguely expected at the time, and that was terminated somewhere during the 80s by the values related to neoliberalism.
where is the sense of the future now? Today, if you ask people what is “futuristic music,” they would reply electronic music from the 90s, or even Kraftwerk, and stuff like that. In a way, we still rely on an old future.
It’s also possible to think of this music as lo-fi and retro in a more roundabout way, as ultimately reminding us that even music at the extreme cutting edge of technological and cultural modernity is always already obsolete. Today’s HD is tomorrow’s lo-fi, and today’s ultra modern pop is tomorrow’s old skool.
Or rather, the plaza was once a public, civic and communal space. These days the plaza is privately owned but the public can come and spend their money on the nice things there.
That default Windows XP background wallpaper of the rolling hills was Microsoft’s attempt to tell us, ‘Look, isn’t the technology-filled future open and full of sunshine?’
when inequality has returned to Gilded Age levels, when “automation and AI” threaten to turn today’s youth into a vast sea of precariat kept docile in an overly upbeat digital reality-show-cum-prison —what happened to the future we were supposed to inherit?
The poor image is a copy in motion. Its quality is bad, its resolution substandard. As it accelerates, it deteriorates. It is a ghost of an image, a preview, a thumbnail, an errant idea, an itinerant image distributed for free, squeezed through slow digital connections, compressed, reproduced, ripped, remixed, as well as copied and pasted into other channels of distribution.
It mocks the promises of digital technology. Not only is it often degraded to the point of being just a hurried blur, one even doubts whether it could be called an image at all. Only digital technology could produce such a dilapidated image in the first place.
“Built out of a tiny loop of vocal from Chris De Burgh’s ‘The Lady in Red’ and a vintage eighties computer-animation graphic called ‘Rainbow Road’” set to the backdrop of a dark city skyline, the song paints a desolate picture of modern life. Lopatin takes De Burgh’s saccharine love song and mocks its original meaning by endlessly looping one line from the song, “there’s nobody here”.
What distinguishes "retromania" from other ways of assessing or using the past? After all, forms of nostalgia or arcadianism – the Victorian revival of Gothic, say – have arisen, sometimes very productively, throughout history. Reynolds argues that retro revives a past that is barely the past (all those I Love the 1990s-style shows), and does so, using video- and internet-enhanced documentation, with a forensic precision that precludes creative distortion and the art that comes from misremembering.
Put this way, Reynolds seems to be describing the kinds of bricolage and hyper-referentiality of postmodernism. But he's also narrating the trickle-down effect, philosophically as much as technologically, of the remix culture of the late 1980s
